# Leeds Trinity University Research Data Management Policy  

Introduction  

Leeds Trinity University recognises that good research demands good data management in the support of academic integrity, openness and good stewardship. It will ensure that research data is managed to high standards throughout the research data lifecycle.  

The effective management of Research Data will help us to:  

meet the requirements of our funders   
recognise the value and impact of our research data, to ourselves and others   
improve the visibility of and our reputation for research and create opportunities for further research collaboration   
encourage open enquiry and allow results to be independently tested, improving the overall quality of research.  

# Definition of Research Data  

Research data means information in digital, computer-readable format or paper based that:  

is contained or presented in various ways including notes, facts, figures, tables, images (still and moving), audio or visual recordings; and which is collected, generated or obtained during the course of or as a result of undertaking research (which includes but is not limited to conducting field or laboratory experiments, conducting trials, surveys, interviews, focus groups or analysis of data); and which is subsequently used by the researcher as a basis for making calculations or drawing conclusions to develop, support or revise theories, practices and findings.  

This policy encompasses data from research that has the potential for publication, regardless of whether or not the research is funded. It applies to research carried out by academic staff and Postgraduate Researchers, but is unlikely to apply to Undergraduate research except in exceptional circumstances.  

# Policy  

1. Research data will be managed in accordance with funder, legislative and ethical requirements throughout the research data lifecycle.   
2. Use of others’ data should always conform to legal, ethical and regulatory frameworks including appropriate acknowledgement.   
3. Responsibility for research data management during any research project or programme lies with responsible owners such as Principal Investigators (PIs).   
4. A Data Management Plan that explicitly addresses the capture, management, integrity, accessibility, usability, confidentiality, preservation, sharing and publication of research data must be created for each proposed research project or funding application at the outset. Sufficient metadata shall also be created and stored to aid discovery and re-use. Data management plans should take account of and ensure compliance with relevant legislative frameworks which may limit public access to the data (for example, in the areas of data protection, intellectual property and human rights).   
5. If there are sound reasons why the openness of research data may need to be restricted (eg to protect commercial interests, protect individual confidentiality and privacy, avoid security risks, protect sensitive sites, etc), then justification for this must be included in the Data Management Plan.   
6. The University will provide mechanisms and services for storage, backup, registration, deposit and retention of research data assets in support of current and future access, during and after completion of research projects.   
7. Where possible, researchers should seek to recover the direct costs of managing research data generated by projects from the research funder.   
8. All research data should be offered for deposit and preservation in the University’s PURE Research Information System in a citable form, unless specified otherwise in the Data Management Plan.   
9. Data should not be deposited with any organisation that does not commit to its access and availability for re-use. Exclusive rights to reuse or publish research data should not be handed over to commercial publishers without retaining the rights to make the data openly available, unless this is a condition of funding.   
10. At the completion of each research project, the PI should ensure that all relevant research data are made available, subject to meeting appropriate requirements, in the location specified in the data management plan.   
11. Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee will be responsible for reviewing and updating this policy.  

# Further Advice and Guidance  

RCUK Draft Concordat on Open Research Data http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/opendata/  

RCUK Common Principles on Data Policy: http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/research/datapolicy/  

Digital Curation Centre http://www.dcc.ac.uk/  

DCC tool for Data Management Planning https://dmponline.dcc.ac.uk/  

University of Edinburgh Research Data Management Guidance http://www.ed.ac.uk/schools-departments/information-services/services/researchsupport/data-library/research-data-mgmt  