# Research Data Management Policy  

Approved by Research Committee May 2014  

Approved by Academic Board June 2014  

# Background  

1. This policy aims to provide a strategic framework for the management of data generated by research projects at Royal Holloway. “Research data” is defined here as the recorded information (regardless of the form or the media) necessary to support or validate a research project’s observations, findings or outputs.   
2. The effective and efficient management of research data is fundamental to high quality research and academic integrity.   
3. Royal Holloway acknowledges its obligations to its research funders, the research community and the wider public to ensure that the management of research data is not only effective and efficient but also complies with the generally accepted principles of open access: that research data is a public good produced in the public interest and should be made freely and openly available with as few restrictions as possible in a timely and responsible manner.   
4. In acknowledging its obligations and recognising the benefits, the College aims to encourage a positive approach to the management of research data across the institution.  

# Policy  

5. Research data will be managed to agreed standards throughout the research data lifecycle and according to College and funder requirements.   
6. Responsibility for research data management during any research project or programme lies with the Principal Investigator (PI).   
7. The College is responsible for the provision of training, support and advice on research data management and such resources/infrastructure or access to resources/infrastructure as necessary for the successful implementation of this policy.   
8. A Data Management Plan (DMP) that explicitly addresses the capture, management (including the safe storage of active research data), integrity, confidentiality, preservation, sharing and publication of research data must be created and stored in the College’s research information system, Pure, by the PI for each proposed research project or funding application. Sufficient metadata shall also be created and stored to aid discovery and re-use. DMPs should take account of and ensure compliance with relevant legislative frameworks which may limit public access to the data (for example, in the areas of data protection, intellectual property and human rights).   
9. All research data should be offered and assessed for deposit and preservation in an appropriate College, national or international data service or domain repository, unless specified otherwise in the DMP.   
10. Data should not be deposited with any organisation that does not commit to its access and availability for re-use, unless this is a condition of the project funding or arising from other requirements.   
11. At the completion of each research project, the PI should ensure that all relevant research data are made available, subject to meeting appropriate requirements, in the location specified in the DMP.   
12. The College Research Committee will be responsible for reviewing and updating this policy.  

The College recognises the following benefits of implementing this policy: support for the re-use of data; improved data integrity, security and access management; opportunities for further research collaboration; improved research reproducibility and validation; further development of research skills; the ability to cite data as a publication; improved institutional research reputation;  improved relationship with research funders; enhanced impact.  

# Relationship with existing policies  

This policy will operate in conjunction with:  

Guidelines on Research Governance, Research Ethics and Good Research Practice  

Feb 2008  

Open access publications policy  

December 2009  

Research Ethics Guidelines  

August 2010  

# Data backup policy  

Feb 2010  

Regulation of investigatory powers act/freedom of information statement and procedures  

September 2011  

In the drafting of this policy, Royal Holloway gratefully acknowledges the work undertaken in data management policy development by the Universities of Oxford, Sheffield and Leeds and the resources and guidance provided by The Digital Curation Centre.  