# UWE Research Data Management Policy  

## 1 Introduction and Purpose  

### Context  

The University’s Research Strategy aims to achieve globally recognised research with real world impact. The Research Data Management Policy supports this aim by seeking to increase the quality, integrity and accessibility of UWE Bristol’s research data which can lead to greater research impact and enhanced reputation.  

The policy reflects the UWE Bristol Open Research Statement which encourages our researchers to be as open as possible, as early as possible, and to explore options for open research including open access publication of research findings and open sharing of data, taking account of university and other policies.  

Research data management is the effective handling of data that is accessed, used or created in the course of research. Effective research data management is carried out for the entire lifecycle of the research data, from the point of creation through to dissemination, publication and archiving. Aspects of research data management will usually continue long after the initial research project has ended.  

Managing and sharing research data can increase its visibility (and consequently the visibility of research), ensuring the full potential of research is exploited. This can then provide a growing resource for further research, education and training.  

### Purpose  

The University considers the safe and effective management of research data to be integral to good research practice. This purpose of this policy is therefore:  

1. To promote the highest standards of research integrity by ensuring that research data accessed, used or produced by UWE Bristol staff and post graduate research (PGR) students, or under UWE’s auspices, is managed (created, stored, used, reused, archived or destroyed) according to good research practice and ethical requirements, legal and regulatory frameworks and funder requirements.   
2. To establish sound research data management practices which protect the interests of research participants and researchers, and which support the proper conduct of research and validation of research findings.   
3. To promote appropriate preservation, sharing and re-use of research data.   
4. To provide broad and inclusive guidance which enable all employees and PGRs to manage their research data effectively.   
5. To outline the responsibilities and requirements of the University and its researchers.  

Research Data Security Guidance Data Protection Standard for Research  

## 2 Scope and Definitions  

The policy applies to all UWE Bristol employees and PGR students who produce or use research data as part of their research (hereafter “researchers’) regardless of the research funding source.  

The policy applies to all research data, or materials, (digital or physical) created, cocreated or used by all UWE Bristol staff or PGR students.  

Research Data is all data or materials (digital or physical) arising as a result of a research project.  

Research data can be raw data, analysed data, and data which arise during the course of research, including data later translated into another form or destroyed, such as audio and video recordings. Examples of research data include, but are not limited to, statistics, collections of digital images, sound and video recordings, transcripts of interviews, survey data and fieldwork observations with appropriate annotations, an interpretation, an artwork, archives, found objects, published texts or a manuscript, lab books, and data generated by machines and instruments.  

## 3 General Principles  

Research data is a valuable asset which is expensive to produce and sometimes cannot be reproduced. UWE Bristol therefore expects researchers to effectively manage research data.   
Researchers must make themselves aware of, and comply with relevant legislation and regulation, ethical requirements, contractual obligations and funder requirements, professional standards and University policies, as they apply to their research data, during the full research lifecycle.   
Researchers should apply appropriate measures to ensure research participants are protected during the full research data lifecycle, and must comply with both GDPR and the supplementary Data Protection Act 2018.   
UWE Bristol supports the principles of open research. Research data should be preserved and made available for sharing and re-use as quickly as possible, with as few restrictions as possible, when it is appropriate and safe to do so.  FAIR principles  

(findable, accessible, interoperable, re-usable) should be considered as part of this process.  

## 4 Policy/ Procedure/ Code of Practice  

### 4.1 Researcher responsibilities  

All researchers are required to familiarise themselves with this policy and the University’s research data management guidance.  

Researchers must comply with the following requirements, including making themselves aware of, and adhering to, relevant legislation and regulation, funders’ requirements and relevant University policies.  

The UWE Bristol Research Project Manager is responsible for ensuring that there is sound research data management practice in relation to the project. This includes the management of all research data collected, generated or used during a project. A research data management plan must be in place at the start of the research, before any work with research data takes place.  

Researchers are responsible for seeking, where possible, the direct costs of research data management, including the preparation of data for archiving, from their research funder. The resources necessary for the appropriate management of data throughout its life course should be set out in the Research Data Management Plan.  

Collaborative research involving partners outside the University should normally be the subject of a collaboration agreement, and the arrangements for management of research data must be clearly set out in the agreement.  

All research data is subject to the University’s Intellectual Property Policy, and intellectual property issues related to research data must be considered at the outset. Exclusive rights to research data must not be granted to a third party where this will restrict the ability to make the data openly available for re-use unless this is a condition of funding or of a collaboration agreement. The intellectual property rights of others in third party data being used for research must be respected. Commitments about IP, either explicit or implicit, must not be made in communications with companies or other external organisations (see the UWE guide on Intellectual Property and Research).  

Researchers are responsible for complying with UWE’s data security requirements as outlined in UWE guidance, including the Information Security Toolkit, Research Data Security Guidance and Data Protection Guidance.  

o Research data should be actively managed throughout the research lifecycle to protect its integrity and security. Where research data is stored, it must be stored and backed up according to law and regulation, and UWE guidelines.   
o Confidential data must only be stored on UWE approved systems. Other cloud hosted systems are not permitted for this purpose.   
o Researchers must use UWE managed devices, and UWE approved software solutions, to create, store or process restricted or confidential information.   
o Access to data should be controlled, and there should always be more than one appropriate person with access to the data.   
o Where data is collected, transported or stored off site, this must be strictly in accordance with UWE research data security guidance.   
o Where personal data (as defined by the Data Protection Act) is likely to cross international boundaries, the UWE Data Protection Office must be consulted.  

If the UWE Research Project Manager leaves the university, it is the responsibility of the Dean of School to ensure that an appropriate hand over of data takes place, and a new UWE Research Project Manager with responsibility for the data is immediately in place. In the absence of such an arrangement, the Dean of School will be deemed the Research Project Manager in relation to the data. Research Data may not be removed from UWE by a leaving staff member without the express permission in writing from the Dean of Faculty or the Pro Vice Chancellor Research and Enterprise, as appropriate.  

#### Retention of research data  

Research data must be assessed for retention, according to the UWE Data Retention   
Schedule. Research data not selected for retention must be appropriately and securely   
destroyed in a timely way, and a record of its destruction made. o Destruction may need to take place because the research data is not deemed sufficiently valuable to warrant the costs of storing and supporting it. o Research data may also need to be destroyed where consents, or legal or regulatory requirements, mean that this is necessary.  

#### Sharing and re-using research data  

The UWE Research Project Manager / PI is responsible for ensuring that all legal, ethical and contractual requirements are complied with in relation to third party access to data.  

Where safeguards can be set in place which will allow access, including where this is in line with participant consent and ethical approval, where this is in line with any legal or contractual obligations such as those relating to intellectual property and where data may be of use to others, it is the expectation that data will be made available for sharing and re-use.  

o Such research data will normally be preserved and made openly available within 12 months of completion of the project, with as few restrictions as possible on use by depositing it in an appropriate national or international archive, and/or the UWE data repository.   
o In relation to personal data, the retention period is governed by Data Protection legislation and this must be complied with, as well as complying with the terms of the original Participant Consent. Such research data can only be preserved if it is fully anonymised and cannot be linked back to research participants. Metadata to aid discovery of all research data, including any research data held in collaborating institutions, must be provided to the UWE Research Data repository within 12 months of the end of the project, whether or not it is deemed appropriate to be made publicly available.   
Where data is to be accessed by third parties via the UWE Research Data Repository, data documentation should be sufficient for the data to be understandable and reuseable.  

Where research data cannot be accessed by others for good reasons, the data may still need to be retained for potential verification of the integrity of the research or future use by the research team, or in compliance with regulation. This should be covered in the Research Data Management Plan. However, in relation to personal data, the retention period is governed by Data Protection legislation and this must be complied with, as well as complying with the terms of ethical approval and the original participant consent. Retention must always be considered on a case by case basis.  

Unless constrained otherwise, e.g. for reasons of sensitivity or commercial interest, researchers must include a data access statement in any publication based upon it. This should cite the research data and how to access it, where appropriate. Where it is inappropriate for the data to be made openly available, a reference must be made to the location of the metadata.  

### 4.2 Postgraduate Research Student and Supervisor Responsibilities  

PGR students are expected to comply with the general requirements for storing, managing and sharing data as outlined above.  

PGR students are advised to check the ownership of their data with the UWE IP team particularly where they are in receipt of funding.  

The Director of Studies, as UWE Research Project Manager, is responsible for ensuring that a research data management plan is in place for each PGR project under their management. This must be completed by the PGR, in consultation and partnership with, and approved by, the Director of Studies, and in consultation with the supervisory team and other UWE colleagues as necessary, by the time of the first progression exam. The plan should be reviewed at subsequent milestones.  

Research data relating to doctoral theses should be added to the UWE research data repository as part of the completion process, when it is appropriate and safe to do so. Such research data will be subject to an automatic 24 month embargo.  

Full requirements relating to the creation of research data management plans, and the deposit of research data to the UWE Research Data Repository, can be found in the Graduate School Handbook.  

### 4.3 University responsibilities  

The University will provide the infrastructure, advice and training to support research data management, including mechanisms for the registration, storage, deposit and retention of research data throughout its life cycle.  

The University will preserve and provide access to research data, beyond the duration of a research activity and in accordance with specific retention requirements.  

The University will provide a research data repository to allow researchers to preserve their data, openly publish their data and enable access to their data when it is appropriate to do so.  

The University will provide methods and procedures for controlled access to restricted data for approved researchers.  

Principles of findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR) data are promoted to all relevant research and support staff and other stakeholders  

## 5 Further guidance and support  

The policy will be implemented in conjunction with advocacy, training and support from Research Governance and Library Services.  

Support for research data management is available from:  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Manageyourresearchdata</td></tr><tr><td>UWE Research Data Repository - repository@uwe.ac.uk</td></tr><tr><td>ResearchDataSecurity</td></tr><tr><td>Library Research Support Team - lib.rke@uwe.ac.uk</td></tr><tr><td>Research Governance - reserachgovernance@uwe.ac.uk</td></tr><tr><td>DataProtectionOffice-dataprotection@uwe.ac.uk</td></tr><tr><td>UWE Learning & Development - My Learning Staff Development Hub (UWE intranet)</td></tr></table></body></html>  

## 6 Ownership and Oversight  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Document name:</td><td>Research Data Management Policy</td></tr><tr><td>Version number:</td><td>V2.0</td></tr><tr><td>Equality Analysis:</td><td>Draft submitted for comment March 2022, currently</td></tr><tr><td>First approved by:</td><td>reviewing initial feedback Academic Board 12/10/2022</td></tr><tr><td>This version approved by:</td><td>University Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee 15/06/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Effective from:</td><td>05/12/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Next review date:</td><td>2025</td></tr><tr><td>Senior Policy Owner:</td><td>Director of LCl and Director of RBI</td></tr><tr><td>Policy Author:</td><td>Research Governance Manager, RBI</td></tr><tr><td>Overseeing committee:</td><td>Head of Research Support, Library Services Research and Knowledge Exchange Committee</td></tr><tr><td>Compliance measures:</td><td>Instances where it is not possible to manage research data in line with the RDM policy will be noted, reviewed</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Related policies, procedures and codes of practice:</td><td>and escalated as appropriate. GDPRResearchGovernanceStandard</td></tr><tr><td>UWERecordsManagementPolicy</td></tr><tr><td>UWEretentionschedule</td></tr><tr><td>DataProtectionPolicy</td></tr><tr><td>Related legislative and/or regulatory requirements</td><td>Concordat to Support Research integrity. Research Funder Research Data Management and Open Access policies.</td></tr></table></body></html>  

## 7 Version history  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Version</td><td>Date</td><td>Summaryofchanges</td><td>Author</td></tr><tr><td>V1.0</td><td>2015</td><td>New policy</td><td>Richard Bond, Head of Research Administration, RBI</td></tr><tr><td>V2.0</td><td>Draft May 2022</td><td>Major changes: Expansion of scope toinclude PostGraduateResearchers Revised wording to reflect changes in Data Protection laws,andUwE'srequirements relating to data security. Changes to author titles and roles, and Policy owners.</td><td>Research Governance Manager, RBI Head of Research Support, Library Services</td></tr></table></body></html>  