# Research Data Management (RDM) - Principles of Good Practice  

These principles apply to research data generated by University of Cumbria academic staff and researchers. They do not apply at this stage to post graduate students. The area is fast moving; the principles are based on sector guidance.  

The university supports the sharing of research data as openly as possible (subject to not harming university’s intellectual property, and/or commercial rights including those of a third party).  

Research data is valuable and needs managing alongside your research methodology.  

RDM requirements are fundamental in future plans for the Research Excellence Framework, (REF), open access, and external funding criteria.  

## 1. Management  

Research data management (RDM) (including costs) should be considered at the earliest practical stage of the project.   
Construct a research data management plan using the generic University of Cumbria template or appropriate funder template   
Review the plan regularly to ensure that practice remains in-line with expected standards  

## 2. Curation  

Use standardised file names, folders and version control   
Ensure security and integrity of the data, compliance with confidentiality undertakings and data protection law, and respect for ownership and intellectual property rights   
The privacy and other legitimate interests of the subjects of research data must be protected. Follow the University’s Code of Practice for Research  

## 3. Preservation  

Ongoing research: use university IT data storage facilities   
Completed research: use university approved research data repository facilities to archive your research   
data and, if required, to make it open access and discoverable  

## 4. Reuse  

Think about the usability of your data and obtain any consents necessary for sharing   
All relevant data must be associated with rich metadata which meets minimum standards set out in funders’ guidance if appropriate   
Research data and supporting material must be sufficient to enable other researchers to understand how it was created or acquired, and, to assess its reuse potential.   
Make people aware that you have created some data – have a communications plan  

# Benefits of making Research Data openly available (Open Access)  

Visibility – more citations, more downloads, more exposure for your research   
Public Good – enhances your reputation and that of the university   
Compliance – Many funders require it   
Preparation for REF 2028 – open access research data is likely to be a requirement   
Enables collaboration with other researchers  